Define error code allocation policy and renumber draft error codes (#2907)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: docs/specification/draft/basic/index.mdx

- Error responses **MUST** include an `error` field with a `code` and `message`.
- Error codes **MUST** be integers.

#### Error Codes

MCP uses the standard JSON-RPC 2.0 error codes (`-32700`, `-32600` to `-32603`)
for general protocol failures.

JSON-RPC 2.0 reserves the range `-32000` to `-32099` for implementation-defined
server errors. MCP partitions this range as follows:

- **`-32000` to `-32019` — legacy.** Codes in this sub-range were allocated by
  implementations before this policy was introduced. New codes **MUST NOT** be
  allocated in this sub-range. Apart from `-32002` and `-32042` (see below),

>   receivers **MUST NOT** assume any specific meaning for these codes.

Reviewer: I think we should add a line to this advising new implementations not to use this range at all - the fewer error code conflicts we have, the better. That wouldn't mean disallowing new/existing implementations to use it, but it's better if they don't, and we should say that.

| `-32022` | [`UnsupportedProtocolVersion`](/specification/draft/schema#unsupportedprotocolversionerror)           |

Codes defined by earlier protocol versions remain reserved and will not be
reused. Implementations of this protocol version **MUST NOT** emit these codes:

- `-32002` — resource not found (2025-11-25 and earlier; replaced by `-32602`).
  Clients [**SHOULD** still
  accept `-32002`](/specification/draft/server/resources#error-handling) from
  servers implementing earlier versions.
- `-32042` — URL elicitation required (2025-11-25 only).

Errors that are purely local to an implementation (for example, a request
timeout raised inside an SDK) are not currently assigned codes by this
specification. Implementations surfacing local errors in JSON-RPC-shaped
structures should ensure they cannot be mistaken for errors received from the
peer. Future versions of the specification may define standard codes for
common local error conditions in the reserved sub-range.

Applications layered on top of MCP **MUST NOT** define error codes inside the
JSON-RPC reserved range (`-32768` to `-32000`); the remainder of the integer

> space is available for application-defined errors.

Reviewer: The distinction between an implementation and an application is not well-defined, so I think this clause makes the interpretation of the spec more confusing as it can reasonably be interpreted to conflict with this statement before it:

> **`-32000` to `-32019` — legacy.** Codes in this sub-range were allocated by implementations before this policy was introduced. New codes **MUST NOT** be allocated in this sub-range. Apart from `-32002` and `-32042` (see below), receivers **MUST NOT** assume any specific meaning for these codes.

If an application is an implementation, then we can't permit continued use of the legacy range while also disallowing use of the entire reserved range (which is a superset of the legacy range).

I also think that if an application is an implementation, then the clause is partially-redundant with the statement immediately after that one:

> **`-32020` to `-32099` — reserved for the MCP specification.** Error codes in this sub-range are defined exclusively by the MCP specification and recorded in the schema. Implementations **MUST NOT** emit any code from this sub-range that is not defined by this specification and **MUST** use defined codes only with their specified meanings.

If an application is not an implementation... I'm not sure how we would differentiate that besides "you probably know what this means."

To the point, though: I think we should just remove the clause and make sure that our normative language about implementation affordances applies equally whether an application is an implementation or not.

- Error responses **MUST** include an `error` field with a `code` and `message`.
- Error codes **MUST** be integers.

#### Error Codes

> MCP uses the standard JSON-RPC 2.0 error codes (`-32700`, `-32600` to `-32603`)

Reviewer 2: I think we should mention -32768 to -32000 are reserved by JSON-RPC 2.0 for pre-defined errors, even if only the listed codes are currently in use.

Author: Hm, it's a fair point but I wonder if we want to essentially restate JSONRPC specification inside MCP?

That seems like a slippery slope potentially where we pull in every external definition (say, SSE, HTTP, JSONRPC).

Not sure if we have a general view on this, maybe @localden has a view here?

I'm happy to add the spec language pointing out the JSONRPC reserved range as an FYI here at the cost of duplicating JSONRPC itself a little here.

Reviewer 2: I agree that we generally shouldn't restate JSON-RPC spec, but we're already doing so with the error codes in use. And the practical reason is to deter developers who might never read the JSON-RPC spec, but do read this one, from being clever and using a reserved error code (unknowingly). But it's not a big deal. Just think it could reduce the risk of exactly the kind of clever error tricks, that cause trouble down the line

for general protocol failures.

JSON-RPC 2.0 reserves the range `-32000` to `-32099` for implementation-defined
server errors. MCP partitions this range as follows:

> - **`-32000` to `-32019` — implementation-defined.** Existing SDKs and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **`-32000` to `-32019` — legacy.** Codes in this sub-range were allocated by
```

>   implementations use codes in this sub-range for their own purposes (for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  implementations before this policy was introduced. New codes **MUST NOT** be
```

>   example, local timeout or connection errors). The MCP specification will

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  allocated in this sub-range. Apart from `-32002` and `-32042` (see below), receivers
```

>   never define error codes in this sub-range, and new implementation-defined

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  **MUST NOT** assume any specific meaning for these codes.
```

>   from this sub-range at all. Apart from `-32002` and `-32042` (see below),

Reviewer 4: -32042 is not in that range, so feels odd to mention here?

Author: Fixed!

>   codes **MUST NOT** be introduced here. With the exception of the historical

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

>   codes listed below, receivers **MUST NOT** assign cross-implementation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

>   semantics to these codes: the same code may carry different meanings in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

>   different implementations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

- **`-32020` to `-32099` — reserved for the MCP specification.** Error codes
  in this sub-range are defined exclusively by the MCP specification and
  recorded in the [schema](/specification/draft/schema). Implementations

>   **MUST NOT** emit codes from this sub-range with meanings other than those

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  **MUST NOT** emit any code from this sub-range that is not
```

>   defined by the specification.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  defined by this specification and **MUST** use defined codes only with their
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  specified meanings.

```

MCP defines the following error codes:

| Code     | Name                                                                                                  |
| -------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `-32020` | [`HeaderMismatch`](/specification/draft/schema#headermismatcherror)                                   |
| `-32021` | [`MissingRequiredClientCapability`](/specification/draft/schema#missingrequiredclientcapabilityerror) |
| `-32022` | [`UnsupportedProtocolVersion`](/specification/draft/schema#unsupportedprotocolversionerror)           |

Codes defined by earlier protocol versions remain reserved and will not be

> reused: `-32002` (resource not found, 2025-11-25 and earlier; replaced by

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
reused. Implementations of this protocol version **MUST NOT** emit these codes:

```

> `-32602`, though [clients **SHOULD** still accept

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `-32002` — resource not found (2025-11-25 and earlier; replaced by `-32602`).
```

> `-32002`](/specification/draft/server/resources#error-handling) from servers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Clients [**SHOULD** still
```

> implementing earlier versions) and `-32042` (URL elicitation required,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  accept `-32002`](/specification/draft/server/resources#error-handling) from
```

> 2025-11-25 only).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  servers implementing earlier versions.
- `-32042` — URL elicitation required (2025-11-25 only).
```

- Error responses **MUST** include an `error` field with a `code` and `message`.
- Error codes **MUST** be integers.

#### Error Codes

MCP uses the standard JSON-RPC 2.0 error codes (`-32700`, `-32600` to `-32603`)
for general protocol failures.

JSON-RPC 2.0 reserves the range `-32000` to `-32099` for implementation-defined
server errors. MCP partitions this range as follows:

- **`-32000` to `-32019` — implementation-defined.** Existing SDKs and
  implementations use codes in this sub-range for their own purposes (for
  example, local timeout or connection errors). The MCP specification will
  never define error codes in this sub-range, and new implementation-defined

>   codes **SHOULD NOT** be introduced here. With the exception of the historical

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  codes **MUST NOT** be introduced here. With the exception of the historical
```

  codes listed below, receivers **MUST NOT** assign cross-implementation
  semantics to these codes: the same code may carry different meanings in
  different implementations.
- **`-32020` to `-32099` — reserved for the MCP specification.** Error codes
  in this sub-range are defined exclusively by the MCP specification and
  recorded in the [schema](/specification/draft/schema). Implementations
  **MUST NOT** emit codes from this sub-range with meanings other than those
  defined by the specification.

> Error codes defined by this version of the specification:

Reviewer 4: "by this version of the spec" is IMO a bit unnecessary -- it applies to the whole page.
```suggestion
MCP defines the following error codes:
```

| Code     | Name                                                                                                  |
| -------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `-32020` | [`HeaderMismatch`](/specification/draft/schema#headermismatcherror)                                   |
| `-32021` | [`MissingRequiredClientCapability`](/specification/draft/schema#missingrequiredclientcapabilityerror) |
| `-32022` | [`UnsupportedProtocolVersion`](/specification/draft/schema#unsupportedprotocolversionerror)           |

New codes are allocated sequentially starting at `-32020` and proceeding
toward `-32099`.

> 
> Codes defined by earlier protocol versions remain reserved and will not be

Reviewer 4: I don't think this constraints improves anything.
```suggestion

Codes defined by earlier protocol versions remain reserved and will not be
```

reused: `-32002` (resource not found, 2025-11-25 and earlier; replaced by
`-32602`, though [clients **SHOULD** still accept
`-32002`](/specification/draft/server/resources#error-handling) from servers
implementing earlier versions) and `-32042` (URL elicitation required,
2025-11-25 only).

Errors that are purely local to an implementation (for example, a request
timeout raised inside an SDK and never sent to the peer) are best represented
outside the JSON-RPC numeric code space entirely, so they cannot be confused

> with wire-level protocol errors.

Reviewer 4: Not sure I agree with this statement. IMO it would have been better if MCP defined these, and probably we should in the future? MCP is not just a wire-level protocol: it's valuable to define what a client receives if a tool times out, even if it's not something actually sent over the wire.

Author: What about something like this?

```
Errors that are purely local to an implementation (for example, a request
timeout raised inside an SDK) are not currently assigned codes by this
specification. Implementations surfacing local errors in JSON-RPC-shaped
structures should ensure they cannot be mistaken for errors received from
the peer. Future versions of the specification may define standard codes
for common local error conditions in the reserved sub-range.
```
